śuddhā niṣkāmadharmai: pravaragurugirā tatsvarūpaṃ paraṃ te
śuddhaṃ dehendriyādivyapagatamakhilavyāptamāvedayante |
nānātvasthaulyakārśyādi tu guṇajavapussaṅgato'dhyāsitaṃ te
vahnerdāruprabhedeṣviva mahadaṇutādīptatāśāntatādi ||1||
śuddhā: niṣkāma-dharmai:	purified minded people, by their desireless actions
pravara-guru-girā	by competent teacher's instructions
tat-svarūpaṃ paraṃ te	that aspect supreme of Thine
śuddhaṃ deha-indriya-ādi-	immaculate, from body sense etc.,
vyapagatam-	transcending
akhila-vyāptam-āvedayante	and all pervading , come to understand
nānātva-sthaulya-kārśya-ādi	multiplicity, big thin etc.,
tu guṇaja-vapu:-saṅgata:-	indeed are the Gunas in which the bodies are associated
adhyāsitaṃ te	are super imposed on Thee
vahne:-dāru-prabhedeṣu-iva	in fire, due to the wood of different form, just as,
mahat-aṇutā-dīptatā-	bigness, smallness brightness
śāntatā-ādi	dimness etc.,
People, whose minds are purified by performing desireless actions, come to understand from the instructions of competent teachers, Thy supreme aspect which is immaculate, bodiless, taintless, all pervading and transcendent. As for the qualities of multiplicity, stoutness, thinness etc., which are in association with the bodies constituted of the three gunas, are super imposed on Thee. It is like the expensiveness, small ness, dimness and brilliance of fire according to the nature of the fuel (wood) on which it manifests.
ācāryākhyādharasthāraṇisamanumilacchiṣyarūpottarāra-
ṇyāvedhodbhāsitena sphuṭataraparibodhāgninā dahyamāne |
karmālīvāsanātatkṛtatanubhuvanabhrāntikāntārapūre
dāhyābhāvena vidyāśikhini ca virate tvanmayī khalvavasthā ||2||
ācārya-ākhya-	teacher's teachings
adharastha-araṇi-	are the lower fire stick
samanumilat-śiṣya-rūpa-	coming in a disciple form
uttara-araṇi-	is the upper fire stick
āvedha:-udbhāsitena	striking (which) is lit (glows)
sphuṭatara-paribodha-	perfectly clear knowledge
agninā dahyamāne	fire, by which is burnt
karmālī-vāsanā-	the many action's desires (tendencies)
tat-kṛta-tanu-	by which is generated, with the
bhuvana-bhrānti-	body identification misconception
kāntāra-pūre	such a forest full (is burnt)
dāhya-abhāvena	then with a lack of burning material
vidyā-śikhini ca virate	when the knowledge generated fire also subsides
tvat-mayī khalu-avasthā	in Thee the total merger state alone (is there)
The fire of knowledge is ignited by the striking of two fire sticks, the lower one represents the teachings of the teacher, and the upper one the disciple (who comes seeking the knowledge). This fire illuminates perfectly clear knowledge and burns the forest full of many tendencies and desires which are an effect of past actions, and also the ignorance of identification with the body and the world. When such a forest is burnt up, the fire (of knowledge) for want of fuel also subsides (in Thee). Then the state of total merger in Thee alone remains.
evaṃ tvatprāptito'nyo nahi khalu nikhilakleśahānerupāyo
naikāntātyantikāste kṛṣivadagadaṣāḍguṇyaṣaṭkarmayogā: |
durvaikalyairakalyā api nigamapathāstatphalānyapyavāptā
mattāstvāṃ vismaranta: prasajati patane yāntyanantān viṣādān||3||
evaṃ tvat-prāptita:-anya:	thus Thy attainment, besides it (other than it)
na-hi khalu	most certainly not
nikhila-kleśa-hāne:-upāya:	all sufferings' eradicating means
na-ekānta-atyantikā:-te	nor complete removing or recurrence are they (capable of)
kṛṣi-vat-	like cultivation (or like)
agada-ṣāḍguṇya-	medicines, the six gunas,
ṣaḍkarma-yogā:	the six actions of Yoga
durvaikalyai:-akalyā:	with difficulties (which are) difficult to overcome, (impractical)
api nigama-pathā:-	also are the Vedic paths
tat-phalāni-api-avāptā	their results even if achieved
mattā:-tvāṃ vismaranta:	(becoming) arrogant, Thee, they forget
prasajati patane	proceeding into downfall
yānti-anantān viṣādān	undergo endless sufferings
Other than the attainment of Thee, certainly, the other means of eradicating sufferings, which are resorted to, like cultivation, medicine, the six gunas, the six steps of Yoga etc., are ultimately ineffective in completely removing or the recurrence of all sufferings. The Vedic paths are difficult to pursue with their many inherent difficulties. Even if they are somehow pursued and their results obtained, by some, they in arrogance forget Thee, (who are the ultimate aim) and are led into downfall and undergo endless sufferings.
tvallokādanyaloka: kvanu bhayarahito yat parārdhadvayānte
tvadbhītassatyaloke'pi na sukhavasati: padmabhū: padmanābha |
evaṃ bhāve tvadharmārjitabahutamasāṃ kā kathā nārakāṇāṃ
tanme tvaṃ chindhi bandhaṃ varad kṛpaṇabandho kṛpāpūrasindho ||4||
tvat-lokāt-anya-loka:	Thy loka (world) (Vaikuntha), other worlds
kva-nu bhaya-rahita:	where indeed is (which is) fearless
yat parārdha-dvaya-ante	because at the end of two Paraardhaas
tvat-bhīta:-	from Thee (as Time) is afraid
satya-loke-api	in the Satyaloka also
na sukha-vasati: padmabhū:	not in peace lives Brahmaa
padmanābha	O Padmanaabha!
evaṃ bhāve-tu-	that being so
adharma-arjita-bahu-tamasāṃ	by unrighteousness earned many sins
kā kathā nārakāṇām	what to say of human beings
tat-me tvaṃ	therefore mine, O Thou!
chindhi bandhaṃ	cut off bondage
varad kṛpaṇabandho	O Bestower of Boons! O Friend of Lowly!
kṛpāpūrasindho	O Ocean full of mercy!
O Lotus Naval One! Where is there another fearless world other than Thy world the Vaikunthaloka? Residing in Satyaloka also, at the end of two Paraardhaas, Brahmaa is afraid of Thee (as Time) and does not live in peace. That being so, what to say of human beings who keep accumulating sins by unrighteous means! O Bestower of Boons! O friend of the Lowly! O Ocean full of mercy! therefore, do cut off my bondage.
yāthārthyāttvanmayasyaiva hi mama na vibho vastuto bandhamokṣau
māyāvidyātanubhyāṃ tava tu viracitau svapnabodhopamau tau |
baddhe jīvadvimuktiṃ gatavati ca bhidā tāvatī tāvadeko
bhuṅkte dehadrumastho viṣayaphalarasānnāparo nirvyathātmā ||5||
yāthārthyāt-	in reality
tvat-mayasya-eva	of Thy selfness only
hi mama na vibho	certainly , my is not O Lord!
vastuta: bandha mokṣau	in fact bondage or liberation
māyā-vidyā-tanubhyāṃ	(by Thy) Maayaa and knowledge aspects
tava tu viracitau	of Thine indeed are manifested
svapna-bodha-upamau tau	dream and awakening, like those two
baddhe jīvat-vimuktiṃ	in a bonded and liberated, while living
gatavati ca bhidā	is achieved, the difference is
tāvatī tāvat-eko	this much, that, one
bhuṅkte deha-druma-stha:	eats, on a body tree perched
viṣaya-phala-rasāt	sense experience fruits
na-apara: nirvyatha-ātmā	not the other one, (and so), is a non suffering soul
O Lord! In reality, for me, who is merged in Thyselfness only, there is no bondage or liberation. Thy two aspects of Maayaa and knowledge manifest, indeed, like dreaming and awakening. The difference between the two, the bonded and the one who has achieved liberation while living, is that, the former, perched on the tree of the body has to eat the fruits of the sense experiences, while the latter does not have to do so and so is a non suffering soul.
jīvanmuktatvamevaṃvidhamiti vacasā kiṃ phalaṃ dūradūre
tannāmāśuddhabuddherna ca laghu manasaśśodhanaṃ bhaktito'nyat |
tanme viṣṇo kṛṣīṣṭhāstvayi kṛtasakalaprārpaṇaṃ bhaktibhāraṃ
yena syāṃ maṅkṣu kiñcid guruvacanamilattvatprabodhastvadātmā ||6||
jīvan-muktatvam-	while living, liberation
evaṃ-vidham-iti vacasā	like this, such words
kiṃ phalaṃ dūra dūre	what is the use, far fetched
tat-nāma-aśuddha-buddhe:-	that concept (is) to an impure mind
na ca laghu manasa:-śodhanaṃ	and there is not a bit of mind purification
bhaktita:-anyat	other than devotion
tat-me viṣṇo kṛṣīṣṭhā:-	that (devotion) for me, O Vishnu! Bring about
tvayi kṛta-sakala-prārpaṇaṃ	in Thee all surrendering
bhaktibhāram	devotion intense (may be)
yena syām maṅkṣu	by which I may soon
kiñcit guru-vacana-milat-	along with some instructions from the Guru
tvat-prabodha:-tvat-ātmā	Thy realisations and Thy oneness (may achieve).
Of what use are the words about the state of liberation in the embodied soul? This concept is far fetched for the impure minded. There is no way other than devotion for the mind to be even a bit purified. O Lord Vishnu! Do bring about that for me which by intense devotion, with surrendering of all fruits of action to Thee, and with Thy realisation by the teachings from a Guru, I may achieve oneness with Thee.
śabdbrahmaṇyapīha prayatitamanasastvāṃ na jānanti kecit
kaṣṭaṃ vandhyaśramāste cirataramiha gāṃ bibhrate niṣprasūtim |
yasyāṃ viśvābhirāmāssakalamalaharā divyalīlāvatārā:
saccitsāndraṃ ca rūpaṃ tava na nigaditaṃ tāṃ na vācaṃ bhriyāsam ||7||
śabda-brahmaṇi-api-iha	in Vedas and other scriptures, also here,
prayatita-manasa:-	totally devoted minds
tvāṃ na jānanti kecit	Thee do not know, some (such people)
kaṣṭaṃ vandhya-śramā:- te	alas, lost is their effort
cirataram-iha gāṃ	for long, here, a cow
vibhrate niṣprasūtim	(they) carry along, which has not calved
yasyāṃ viśva-abhirāmā:-	in which (the Vedas), the world enchanting
sakala-mala-harā:	all impurities removing
divya-līlā-avatārā:	divine sportive incarnations
sat-cit-sāndraṃ	and Pure Consciousness saturated
ca rūpaṃ tava	form of Thee
na nigaditaṃ	is not spoken of
tāṃ na vācaṃ bhriyāsam	that scripture I will not study
In this world there are people who are totally engrossed in the study of Vedas and other scriptures and do not care to know Thee. It is a futile effort on their part just as owning a cow which has not calved. I will not study the scriptures wherein Thy form saturated with Pure Consciousness, and the world enchanting, all purifying and sportive incarnations are not spoken of.
yo yāvān yādṛśo vā tvamiti kimapi naivāvagacchāmi bhūm-
nnevañcānanyabhāvastvadanubhajanamevādriye caidyavairin |
tvalliṅgānāṃ tvadaṅghripriyajanasadasāṃ darśanasparśanādi-
rbhūyānme tvatprapūjānatinutiguṇakarmānukīrtyādaro'pi ||8||
ya: yāvān	that, of that sort
yādṛśa: vā tvam-	or of that type, are Thou
iti kim-api na-eva-	this, what so ever, not at all
avagacchāmi bhūman-	do I understand, O Lord of the Universe!
na-evam-ca-	not also is it that
ananya-bhāva:-	without another thought
tvat-anubhajanam-eva-	Thy worship alone
ādriye caidyavairin	I shall perform, O Destroyer of Shishupaal!
tvat-liṅgānām	Thy images
tvat-aṅghri-	Thy feet
priya-jana-sadasāṃ	lovingly attached to, to their group
darśan-sparśana-ādi:-	meeting, saluting etc.,
bhūyāt-me	may it happen to me
tvat-prapūjā-nati-nuti	Thy worship singing Thy hymns, prostrating to Thee
guṇa-karma-anukīrti:-	and recital of Thy excellences and deeds
ādara:-api	and loving Thee also
O Lord of the Universe! Thou are this, that or of that kind or of that sort, I do not at all understand any of this whatsoever. In spite of my little understanding, O Enemy of Chaidya (Shishupaal)! Thy worship alone I will always dutifully perform. May it thus happen to me that I get to see Thy images and touch the feet of the groups of people who are lovingly attached to Thy feet. May I also worship Thee, sing Thy hymns, prostate to Thee, and lovingly recite Thy excellences and deeds.
yadyallabhyeta tattattava samupahṛtaṃ deva dāso'smi te'haṃ
tvadgehonmārjanādyaṃ bhavatu mama muhu: karma nirmāyameva |
sūryāgnibrāhmaṇātmādiṣu lasitacaturbāhumārādhaye tvāṃ
tvatpremārdratvarūpo mama satatamabhiṣyandatāṃ bhaktiyoga: ||9||
yat-yat-labhyeta	what what ever I get
tat-tat-tava samupahṛtaṃ	that that for Thee I offer
deva dāsa:-asmi te-ahaṃ	O God! Servant am of Thee I
tvat-geha-unmārjana-ādyaṃ	Thy temple cleaning etc.,
bhavatu mama muhu:	may be my always
karma nirmāyam-eva	services without laxity
sūrya-agni-brāhmaṇa-	the sun, fire, Braahmin,
ātmā-ādiṣu	the soul, in all these
lasita-caturbāhum-	resplendent the four armed form
ārādhaye tvāṃ	I worship Thee
tvat-prema-ārdratva-rūpa:	for Thy love melting, in that form,
mama satatam-abhiṣyandatāṃ	may continuously flow as a stream
bhaktiyoga:	through devotion
O Lord! What ever comes to me, I offer to Thee. I am Thy servant. May I always be in Thy service without fail, like cleaning Thy temple etc. May I worship Thy resplendent four armed form in the sun, fire, Braahmin and Aatman. May my love melting heart, through devotion continuously flow into a torrential stream towards Thee.
aikyaṃ te dānahomavrataniyamatapassāṃkhyayogairdurāpaṃ
tvatsaṅgenaiva gopya: kila sukṛtitamā prāpurānandasāndram |
bhakteṣvanyeṣu bhūyassvapi bahumanuṣe bhaktimeva tvamāsāṃ
tanme tvadbhaktimeva draḍhaya hara gadān kṛṣṇa vātālayeśa ||10||
aikyaṃ te	union with Thee
dāna-homa-vrata-niyama-tapa:-	charity, sacrifice, vows, discipline, austerities
sāṃkhya-yogai:-durāpaṃ	and by methods of Saankhya Yoga, is difficult to get
tvat-saṅgena-eva	(by) to Thee attachment only
gopya: kila	the Gopikas indeed
sukṛtitamā:-prāpu:-	the most meritorious ones, obtained
ānanda-sāndram	bliss intense
bhakteṣu-anyeṣu	the devotees, among others
bhūya:su-api	many they may be, even then
bahu-manuṣe bhaktim-eva	highly esteemed devotion alone
tvam-āsāṃ	Thou, of these (Gopikaas) consider
tat-me tvat-bhaktim-eva	that, to me, Thy devotion only
draḍhaya hara gadān	strengthen, remove my sufferings
kṛṣṇa vātālayeśa	O Krishna! O Lord of Guruvaayur!
The state of supreme blissful union with Thee is difficult to be attained by charity, sacrifice, vows, disciplines, austerities or by following the methods of Saankhya Yoga. The most meritorious Gopikaas attained intense bliss only by attachment to Thee. There are many devotees of Thine, but the loving devotion of the Gopikaas, to Thee, is highly esteemed by Thee. May that devotion strengthen in me. O Lord Krishna! O Lord of Guruvaayur! remove my sufferings.